Today, our New Testament reading comes from Philippians 4.
It's a very familiar passage.
We begin in the fourth verse and read through the seventh verse.
Rejoice in the Lord always.
And again, I say rejoice.
Let everyone see your gentleness.
The Lord is near.
Do not be anxious about anything.
Instead, in every situation,
through prayer and petition with thanksgiving, tell your quest to God.
And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Over the last several weeks, Andy and I have
and Mary Beth have been preaching on the idea of salt and light.
The fact that as a Christian, we should be affected by God's love and affect the world by our love.
And we've tried to talk about the things that enable us to be the salt and light that keep us from losing our brightness and our joy and losing our savoriness and the way we season and flavor the world.
for God.
Today, I think what we're talking about is one of the most incredible mysteries and unused gifts that we have in the Christian faith.
And that's the gift of prayer.
So many times, as you heard in the children's sermon, we're so worried that we can't pray as long a prayer as the preacher.
are as eloquent a prayers as the preacher.
And so we're kind of guarded in the way we go about praying.
Let me ask you, what was the first prayer you ever learned?
Now I lay me down to sleep.
How many of you can recite that from memory still?
What was another prayer you learned early?
God is great, God is good, let us thank Him for our food.
We pray about the important things, sleep and food.
We're gonna have God cover those and take care of those.
But the other way we learn is situationally in life, we find ourselves in circumstances where we are overwhelmed.
I think about the story my brother-in-law used to tell, and those of you who've been here while I was here have heard me tell us, my brother-in-law Wayne was having a wedding,
And this is like a universal thing that happens.
In the middle of the wedding, there was one particular child that was over enjoying themselves.
And they were drawing tension to themselves.
And at the same time, the universal is there was a parent there that would have killed them on site if it was legal.
and drug them out the way.
But what happens is, is this what happens with most parents?
The parents snatched that child up, threw them on their shoulder and headed for the back door.
And as they were walking to the back door, the kid just leaned out and said, y'all pray for me.
Sometimes we come into circumstances that we just feel overwhelmed and we need some help, sweet Jesus.
Help us please.
As much as we laugh and as much as we pray, every Sunday we pray the Lord's prayer, what I've found in my life is I still hadn't captured the full benefit that God offers me in the gift of prayer.
In this season of the year, in our family, we have kind of a special season.
You got valentines coming up on February 15th.
I met Cindy.
But on February 10th, here, 2006, I had quadruple bypass surgery.
And I got to come home on Valentine's.
But during the surgery and afterwards, I made an incidental discovery about the nature of prayer.
Have you ever learned something about backing into it?
While I was having my surgery and when I went into recovery, Cindy was waiting for him to get word and she never got word and she never got word and she never got word.
And finally, they went up and told her that I'd had some issues.
The issues were this.
When I woke up in the recovery room, it was really dark and I was by myself and I was hurting like crazy.
My back was aching.
And it was dark.
I didn't think there was anybody in there, and I just said, oh, and I heard a nurse say, oh, so you're awake.
And I'm like, yeah, my back is killing me.
And she said, well, it should.
You had a fight with the orderlies.
You pulled your intubation too bad, and we don't like you very much.
You see, when I was young, I'd nearly drowned, and I have this
claustrophobic feeling of not being able to breathe.
And so every time I get intubated, every when I got my CPAP, I just have this sense of, I gotta breathe, I gotta breathe.
When I went home, I would wake up and scare Cindy to death at night because I would have epic episodes of not being able to breathe.
And as I laid there and healed,
and was mad at God for being sick and mad at God for not being able to preach.
I was trying to pray and all of a sudden I realized spiritually I was having that same feeling.
I couldn't catch my spiritual breath.
I felt like I was suffocating.
I felt like I was dying.
Have you ever been in a hold your breath contest?
I don't know, maybe that's something a young boy.
Whenever we were staying in Oklahoma City, my brother and I would go to the pool and see who could swim under the water longest.
And I'm a very determined, stubborn person.
I would have died underwater before I let him beat me.
And so there would be, but there would be times when I would come out of the water and just think, you know, I don't know if I'm going to make it.
The gift of prayer from God.
I'm beginning to discover for me to capture it is much like the gift of breath.
It is this beautiful in and out that brings life.
Part of the reason I'm on a CPAP machine is because not just that I snore, but because when I do sleep, I don't breathe in enough oxygen.
to properly allow me to sleep well.
And so that little machine pumps that air into my lungs and oxygenates my blood and allows it to circulate through my body in order for me to exhale that carbon dioxide and begin again.
When Jesus said to us, pray without ceasing,
What he meant was pray like your breathing.
It not only is a rhythm, it is the gift of life.
It is drawing upon the very presence of God.
It is reclaiming the gift that God gave us in creation of walking and talking with them every single moment of life.
and that we cast away every time we turn from Him and don't breathe in His presence.
If you watch the rhythm of Jesus' life, He prayed in every situation from the temptation to the garden to the cross.
Every conversation He had with people
was laced with a conversation with God.
It was as natural for him as breathing in and breathing out.
Paul wrote to the church at Ephesus, that early church that you should rejoice in the Lord always.
And again, I say rejoice.
But then he turns around and says, but I know you're anxious.
Don't be anxious about anything.
But with prayer and supplication, allow God to give you the gift of peace.
How many times are you sitting there during the day and you think, well, I just breathe eight times in that minute.
Do you ever think about that?
No, because the breathing comes.
How many times when you have a cold or sinus, do you think,
I can't breathe.
Yeah.
In our faith, the rhythm of our faith is directly tied to our ability to be in prayer with God.
I love as I was, I was prepared for this.
To be honest, I told Cindy this and those of you who are preachers will understand what I'm saying.
I had a really good sermon prepared Friday.
And when I got up this morning, God wasn't happy with it, so we changed.
And what it reminded me of was this breathe in, breathe out.
The fact that God is with us in real time, that He knows when we need His help as we're being toted down the church and about to be walked.
He knows when we haven't
been caught up in breathing him in and having enough air.
And so as I walked around in that this morning, I began to think about the rhythm of the Lord's prayer.
And it is this beautiful example of how we should pray our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Breathing in the goodness of God.
Breathing in the power of God.
Breathing in the Word of God.
Breathing in the will of God.
And we bring in that oxygen and that life giving force.
But then what do we follow that prayer with?
Give us this day our daily bread.
and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us, and lead us not to temptation.
We exhale that carbon-to-not dioxide, those things in our life, our sins, our stresses, those things that weigh upon our heart, those concerns that are
crippling us and making us anxious and afraid those things that are taking our peace.
And as we exhale them, everything from God, I don't know how I'm going to pay the bills at the end of the month to dear Lord, in this social media world, it's all I can do to keep my civility.
We're breathing out that which is contaminating our body unless we get it out.
But then
We breathe in for thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.
That's why Paul can write.
Don't be anxious about anything.
Breathe in the goodness of God.
Breathe out the things that weigh you down, the things that contaminate your life, the sins, the brokenness.
And the miraculous, wonderful genius of God's creation is while each of us is walking around breathing in and out of our lives, He is putting us together to make sure that we're all breathing.
Have you ever had to give CPR?
Some of you are not.
As the community of faith, it's our job to make sure everybody's breathing.
To make sure everybody is somehow in that rhythm of, God is good, I am broken.
God is good, I'm afraid.
And the incredible third dimension of prayer
is not just the breathing in of oxygen and the exhaling of the carbon dioxide and the things that break us, but it is the fact that actually that action brings us life and then we become salt and light for each other because we're alive.
In my heart journey, another little episode when we were in Hattiesburg, I woke up one night, couldn't get peace, called my doctor, couldn't get my doctor,
call my cardiologist, couldn't give my cardiologist, woke Cindy up and said, I'm not right, I need to go the doctor.
Finally, the doctors call back.
They met me at the hospital as they were getting me out of the vehicle.
I just heard the nurses say, we're losing him.
His blood pressure is 68 over 40.
He's thrown a blood clot to his heart.
They gave me the clot buster.
And all I can remember is just nothing until I was awake again.
And I was breathing again.
And my heart was beaten again.
You see, our prayer life is directly connected to our heart life.
to not have the Spirit of God in us, to not have the life of God in us means our heart can't do its business.
I know way more than I want to know about my circulatory system, but this I know the heart takes good stuff in and pumps good stuff out to the lungs.
And that just as in our faith,
We want to have good hearts.
We can't have it without a life of prayer, without a life of the conversation with God to hear his voice.
How many of you've heard God speak directly to you?
Has it been very office?
That's kind of a Moses thing.
When God talks to you, you're even big trouble or you got big stuff ahead of you.
But I've heard Jesus speak to me in the scripture.
I've heard the Holy Spirit speak to me in my soul.
You see, the cool thing about that breathing in is there's no language required.
The Bible says it.
God understands our grunts, our moans, our wordless moments.
And that's the other side of prayer.
We don't have a God who sits up there and twittles thumbs and waits for crisis.
God is still in the garden.
He's walking with you whether you're talking to him or not.
He's talking with you whether you're listening or not.
He's leading you, guiding you, comforting you, sending what you need, whether you are paying attention or not, God is all in on you.
He was all in in creation and He will be all in until He recreates and Jesus comes home and we're living in the revelation truth of a new creation.
And the invitation is simple.
Breathe.
You want to know why so many people who are about yoga and meditation and spiritual things focus so much on your breathing.
Breathe deeply.
Let it go all the way to your toes before you exhale.
When I was in
junior college, this will date me, I took a speed reading course.
Any of y'all ever taking a speed reading course?
It's a blessing and a curse.
I'm married to a woman who will read every single word in every single book.
She is not going to speed read anything.
And it frustrates the tarnation out of her when I'm reading a chapter in about 10 minutes.
He's like, did you even know what that says?
A lot of us try to live our spirituality like that.
We hyperventilize like, breathe out, breathe out, breathe in, breathe out, breathe in, breathe out, breathe in, breathe out.
You know what happens?
You pass out.
You lose consciousness.
That's not how we were designed to pray.
It's not praying curses on people who cut you off in the traffic or asking for blessings when you're waiting on the numbers for the lottery.
Oh, you'd laugh too much on that.
It is more that deep inhaling life, letting life feel your body, and then taking the opportunity to exhale the other things.
We're about to end the season of Lent.
In the New Testament, the word for prayer, really, if you look at the Hebrew word and the Aramaic word, they don't exactly match up.
The Hebrew word is the sense of bringing yourself and your needs and your sins to God.
It is that exhale.
Their make word is more centered in finding yourself in the presence and dialogue with God.
There's this beautiful tension that we live in that calls us not only to celebrate the goodness that God can be and bring in our life, but it also means if you don't breathe out, if you don't get those toxic things out of you, you're going to die.
How many of you have heard the number of people who have died during this cold spell of carbon monoxide poisoning?
If you're inhaling the wrong things, you're gonna die.
If you're seeking to breathe in things that are not of life, you're gonna die.
Perfect chemical example.
If you breathe in oxygen, you talk and act and live normally, you ever breathe in helium?
Oh my, what's gonna happen to you?
You breathe it in and you talk funny because it's not what your body's made to do, so it causes you to
be a little weird.
If you breathe in the wrong things, it causes you to be a little weird and maybe a little sick and maybe even eventually a little dead.
Jesus said, I've come that you might have life and have it abundantly.
He loves you that much.
So what I say to you, God is all in.
You go all in.
Breathe in and breathe out and receive the everyday gift that God seeks to give you and then allow yourself to come alive.
and be the gift that the world needs you to be.
Okay, everybody hold your fingers like this.
No, I'm not.
Let us pray.